Reworking unformed state (#5913)
carbon-language/carbon-lang: proposals/p5913.md

of unsafe code. Whichever semantic model a type uses for its unformed state,
`UnformedInvalid` or `UnformedNoop`, the hardened state must match that
semantic. This hardening only occurs to unformed or uninitialized objects, never
to well formed ones, and there is no restriction on whether both
`UnformedInit.Op` and `UnformedHardenInit.Op` are called or only one. Note that
these hardening interfaces should not be relied on and shouldn't replace broad
automatic initialization, but can allow types to specifically add extra
hardening where it is most useful, and surface if there is an especially
beneficial value to use.

We also propose an interface that can be used when `UnformedInvalid` is
implemented to test for the unformed state:

```carbon
interface IsUnformed {
  require impls UnformedInvalid;

  // The type of `self` will be clarified below.
  fn Op[self: Core.MaybeUnformed(T)]() -> bool;
}

match_first {
impl forall [T:! UnformedInvalid & UnformedHarden] T as IsUnformed {
  fn Op[self: Core.MaybeUnformed(T)]() -> bool {
    return (self as T.(UnformedInvalid.StructT))
               == T.(UnformedInvalid.Value) ||
           (self as T.(UnformedHarden.StructT))

>                == T.(UnformedHarden.Value);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    return (self as T.(UnformedInvalid.StructT))
               == T.(UnformedInvalid.Value) or
           (self as T.(UnformedHarden.StructT))
               == T.(UnformedHarden.Value);
```

fields in the `UnformedInit.StructT` type are available. All of the functions
and methods on `T` are available, but functions that safely operate on unformed
objects of type `T` must accept `Core.MaybeUnformed(T)` to signify this to the
caller and enforce that their definition doesn't make assumptions about the
object being fully initialized. For example, this lets us describe the `Self`
type used in the `IsUnformed` interface for querying:

```carbon
interface IsUnformed {
  requires Self impls UnformedInit;
  fn Op[self: Core.MaybeUnformed(Self)]() -> bool;
}
```

There is also a blanket `impl` for `IsUnformed` that forwards:

```carbon
final impl forall [T:! IsUnformed] Core.MaybeUnformed(T) as IsUnformed {
  fn Op[self: Self]() -> bool {
    // We can call `T`'s implementation on `self` due to it taking
    // its object parameter as `Core.MaybeUnformed(Self)` which is our `Self`.
    return self.(T.(IsUnformed.Op))();
  }
}
```

Types that implement `IsUnformed` have the option of implementing assignment and
destruction with either `Core.MaybeUnformed(T)` as the `self` type, or `T`.
Assignment and destruction can even make different choices. Types without an

> `IsUnformed` implementation _must_ implement assignment and destruction with

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`IsUnformed` implementation (but do support unformed state) _must_ implement assignment and destruction with
```

way by modifying the adapt declaration with the `unsafe` keyword. Such an
adaptor has all the same properties as normal adapters, but the conversions
between the types are only available with `unsafe as`. These adapters can then
explicitly implement other conversion interfaces, but potentially do so
_conditionally_ or impose other restrictions such as only allowing them in one
direction. The syntax choice here was decided in leads issue #5930, with
[alternatives](#alternative-syntax-choices-for-unsafe-as-discussed-in-5930)
discussed below.

When an `interface` uses `extend impl`, we propose that an `impl` of that
interface can also write `extend impl` within its `impl`. Doing so requires that
an `impl` of the extended interface be visible, and incorporates that into the
newly defined `impl` rather than requiring it to be duplicated. This
`extend impl` will end with a semicolon `;`, instead of a definition block in curly
 braces `{`...`}`, but acts as a definition of the members of the extended
 interface. This also allows
the found _impl_ to be `final` because this precludes any changes to the aspects
of the `impl` that were final. This allows adapters to extend which layer of

> these kinds of interface hierarchies they implement without breaking coherence:

Author: Moot -- this paragraph was rewritten and reflowed, so the suggested wrapping no longer applies.

  fn Op[self: Core.MaybeUnformed(Self)]() -> bool;
}
```

There is also a blanket `impl` for `IsUnformed` that forwards:

```carbon
final impl forall [T:! IsUnformed] Core.MaybeUnformed(T) as IsUnformed {
  fn Op[self: Self]() -> bool {
    // We can call `T`'s implementation on `self` due to it taking
    // its object parameter as `Core.MaybeUnformed(Self)` which is our `Self`.
    return self.(T.(IsUnformed.Op))();
  }
}
```

Types that implement `IsUnformed` have the option of implementing assignment and
destruction with either `Core.MaybeUnformed(T)` as the `self` type, or `T`.
Assignment and destruction can even make different choices. Types without an
`IsUnformed` implementation (but do support unformed state) _must_ implement assignment and destruction with
`Core.MaybeUnformed(T)`. When assignment or destruction are implemented with
`Core.MaybeUnformed(T)`, they are called regardless of whether the object is in
the unformed state. When assignment or destruction are implemented with `T`, the
implementation will only call them if `IsUnformed` returns false and using the
normal type. If the `IsUnformed` returns true in these cases, assignment will be

> replaced with initialization, and destruction will be skipped.

Author: Moot -- this paragraph no longer exists. Destruction is now a rule of the language rather than something a type implements with `Core.MaybeUnformed(T)`, so the sentence being reflowed here is gone.

safety for reference here:

-   ["Secure by Design: Google’s Perspective on Memory Safety"](https://research.google/pubs/secure-by-design-googles-perspective-on-memory-safety/),
    specifically the section "Classes of Memory Safety Bugs"
    -   This is very similar to the earlier
        [classification published by Apple](https://security.apple.com/blog/towards-the-next-generation-of-xnu-memory-safety/)
    -   Both build on widely documented bug classifications, such as
        [presented by Microsoft](https://github.com/Microsoft/MSRC-Security-Research/blob/master/presentations/2019_02_BlueHatIL/2019_01%20-%20BlueHatIL%20-%20Trends%2C%20challenge%2C%20and%20shifts%20in%20software%20vulnerability%20mitigation.pdf)

## Goals and use cases

The goal of _unformed state_ is to provide for better balance between safety and
ergonomics prior to initialization and (once we add move semantics to Carbon)
after moves. For example, consider this motivating example control flow:

```carbon
var x: SomeType;

for (SomeLoopKnownNonEmpty()) {
  x = MakeSomeValue(...);
  ...
}

UseSomeValue(x);
```

Where we assign to a variable at the start of the loop, but it is beneficial to

> leave it uninitialized until that point as we have no meaningful value prior and

Reviewer 2: This proposal doesn't make clear some things that I think should be addressed explicitly:
* Does `var x: T;` use `UnformedInit`, or is `x` left uninitialized until something triggers making it unformed?
* What is the signature of the assignment operator? In particular, is it take `ref self: MaybeUnformed(Self)`?

Author: Both are answered explicitly now.

`var x: T;` is checked as if it were `var x: T = (T as Core.DefaultOrUnformed).Op();`, so `Core.Default` wins where it is implemented and `Core.UnformedInit` is the fallback, per leads issue #6739. The declaration being invalid when neither is implemented falls out of there being no `impl` to find: [Initializing a variable with no initializer](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/pull/5913/files#diff-1249dfd7505dbbfc67e4fbb67e8ff0f985b8b993258d46479305c557edc2a6f2R522).

Assignment takes `ref self: Core.MaybeUnformed(Self)` only if it opts in, in which case it is called whether or not the object is unformed and handles both. Without opting in, the language tests `IsUnformed` first for a `UnformedInvalid` type, and for a `UnformedNoop` type runs the implementation unconditionally: [Assignment and destruction](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/pull/5913/files#diff-1249dfd7505dbbfc67e4fbb67e8ff0f985b8b993258d46479305c557edc2a6f2R760).

Both are stated as constraints on whatever interface `=` becomes, since it is still a builtin rather than an interface today.

language-level affordances we provide for optional types as they are designed. A
key goal should be that this allows using `Core.MaybeUnformed(T)` without any
unsafe operations through tools like `if let`.

### Flow-sensitive restrictions on objects known to be unformed

Finally, we tie the previous two components together with flow-sensitive
restrictions on how objects known to be unformed can be used.

An object is known to be in an unformed state when it is declared without an
explicit initializer, such as:

```carbon
var object: SomeType;
```

**Future work:** We also expect to add operations to Carbon that put objects
into this state without a declaration, as we would like to use unformed state
for non-destructively-moved-from objects as well, but those will come in
subsequent and separate proposals.

Because `object` above is known to be in an unformed state, we restrict how it
may be used subsequently: it may be used freely when its expression is
immediately converted to the special type `Core.MaybeUnformed(T)`, but any other
use is rejected until after it has been used as a reference parameter of type

> `Core.MaybeUnformed(T)` to a call other than the type's own destructor. That

Reviewer 3: This feels a bit too magical to me. Why should passing an argument as `ref` trigger a state transition from MaybeUnformed to formed? I can understand needing some way to trigger the state transition, but `ref` doesn't seem like a principled way to achieve this.

My intuition is that Carbon should have _true_ flow-sensitive typing, albeit a very limited model that supports the use cases we require, and nothing more. It would come with a proper syntax, e.g. `fn F(ref arg: Core.MaybeUnformed(T) becomes T)`.

Core.MaybeUnformed(T) can potentially be modelled as a sum type with two cases: `.Formed(T)` and `.Unformed(T)`.

Reviewer 4: This type of property could be verified using flow checking #6118 which was written later than this PR.

With two (conceptual) subsequent phases of checking, we could distinguish between an identifier's "type" (same for its entire scope) and its *flow type* (which changes throughout the body of a function, subject to effects like becoming unformed, or reinitialized).

Author: Agreed, and dropped. A `ref` argument no longer changes an object's state: the transition comes from an effect the function declares as part of its contract, and it can go in either direction: [flow-sensitive restrictions](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/pull/5913/files#diff-1249dfd7505dbbfc67e4fbb67e8ff0f985b8b993258d46479305c557edc2a6f2R921).

The old rule is recorded with the two reasons it fails under [Requiring the first `ref` call to initialize](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/pull/5913/files#diff-1249dfd7505dbbfc67e4fbb67e8ff0f985b8b993258d46479305c557edc2a6f2R1389).

@burakemir -- that is roughly where this landed. The proposal now states its rules in the memory safety model's flow checking rather than inventing its own, and keeps the distinction you describe: the type of a name never changes, only whether its place is known to be initialized, which is computed after type checking and so cannot feed overload resolution or `impl` selection.

-   [Flow-sensitive restrictions on objects known to be unformed](#flow-sensitive-restrictions-on-objects-known-to-be-unformed)
-   [Putting all this together for our use cases](#putting-all-this-together-for-our-use-cases)
-   [C++ types and unformed state](#c-types-and-unformed-state)
    -   [C++ standard library types](#c-standard-library-types)
-   [Passing unformed objects into C++ code](#passing-unformed-objects-into-c-code)
-   [Expected standard type behavior](#expected-standard-type-behavior)
-   [Class types with a vtable](#class-types-with-a-vtable)
-   [Subsetting the object for its unformed state](#subsetting-the-object-for-its-unformed-state)
    -   [Subsetting by fields](#subsetting-by-fields)
-   [Comparison to `MaybeUninit` from Rust](#comparison-to-maybeuninit-from-rust)
-   [Rationale](#rationale)
-   [Alternatives considered](#alternatives-considered)
    -   [Bit-mask based unformed state](#bit-mask-based-unformed-state)
    -   [Conversion oriented API design](#conversion-oriented-api-design)
    -   [Switching to one of the simpler alternatives discussed in #257](#switching-to-one-of-the-simpler-alternatives-discussed-in-257)

<!-- tocstop -->

> # Abstract

Reviewer 2: Doc -> markdown conversion issue for all the headings up to (but not including) "Rationale"
```suggestion
## Abstract
```

-   A flow-sensitive set of rules for how unformed types become fully formed.

# Problem

Carbon is trying to bring a rigorous model to handle complex initialization
scenarios from C++ in a way that maximizes reliability (through bug-detection),
soundness, efficiency, and ergonomics.

Our initial design is detailed in
[proposal \#257: "Initialization of memory and variables"](/proposals/p0257.md).
While that direction remains promising, the specific mechanics suggested there
are incomplete and/or don't seem to achieve the desired result. For example,
that proposal suggests that objects in an unformed state can only be _assigned_
or _destroyed_, and any other operation is invalid. But that leads to a problem:
how does one _implement_ either the assignment or destructor in a way that
doesn't perform an invalid operation? Any access to a field would be just such
an invalid operation, but accessing a field seems like a necessity in this
model. Similarly, how does one establish an unformed state for a new object?
Whatever operation is used seems like it would inherently violate the
constraints trying to be enforced, even returning an object in unformed state is

> declared an error in #257.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
declared an error in [#257](/proposals/p0257.md).
```

Ultimately, we need a reworked way of managing the unformed state of types in
order to make it implementable and coherent.

# Background

-   [Proposal \#257: "Initialization of memory and variables"](/proposals/p0257.md)
-   [Background](/proposals/p0257.md#background) of that proposal
-   Rust's
    [MaybeUninit](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/mem/union.MaybeUninit.html)

> ## Safety specific background

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Safety-specific background
```

and integrated into a more comprehensive safety story when that arrives. We
still try to provide some fundamental background on these sub-classes of memory
safety for reference here:

-   ["Secure by Design: Google’s Perspective on Memory Safety"](https://research.google/pubs/secure-by-design-googles-perspective-on-memory-safety/),
    specifically the section "Classes of Memory Safety Bugs"
    -   This is very similar to the earlier
        [classification published by Apple](https://security.apple.com/blog/towards-the-next-generation-of-xnu-memory-safety/)
    -   Both build on widely documented bug classifications, such as
        [presented by Microsoft](https://github.com/Microsoft/MSRC-Security-Research/blob/master/presentations/2019_02_BlueHatIL/2019_01%20-%20BlueHatIL%20-%20Trends%2C%20challenge%2C%20and%20shifts%20in%20software%20vulnerability%20mitigation.pdf)

# Goals and use cases

The goal of _unformed state_ is to provide for better balance between safety and
ergonomics prior to initialization and (once we add move semantics to Carbon)
after moves. For example, we can consider an example set of control flows that

> motivates this:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
after moves. For example, consider this motivating example control flow:
```

we always enter the loop. Rather than needing a separate operation for the first
iteration compared to all subsequent ones, or needing to manufacture a
meaningless value, unformed state lets us assign in all iterations uniformly and
then reliably use the now well formed value after the loop.

The idea is to leverage either of two flexibilities that frequently are
available in the design of a type, and expose those to the language so that it
can automatically synthesize the necessary behavior for this pattern.

Specifically:

-   Types which have a detectable invalid state (such as null for a non-null
    pointer)
-   Types for which there are states that make the destructor a no-op

For types that _do_ support unformed state, they may do so in three broad
categories based on the specific combination of the above properties they have:

1. Types where there is an invalid state, and it can _optionally_ be queried,
   but the destructor will be a no-op without checking for that state.
2. Types where it is _necessary_ to query for an invalid state and skip
   meaningful logic in the destructor when in that state in order to use that

>    state when unformed.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
   meaningful logic in the destructor when in that state in order to not use
   that invalid state when unformed.
```
Is this another way to say what it's trying to say?

Author: Tried a different structure.

> 3. Types that have a valid state with a no-op destructor that they use when

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
3. Types that have a valid state with a no-op destructor that they reuse when
```

   unformed. These cannot support querying whether they are unformed.

These different categories also result in tradeoffs in the capabilities and
implementation approach for unformed state. Types may be able to support more
than one of these strategies, and will have to select which one they use based
on which tradeoffs are right for that specific type.

Types may alternatively _not_ have unformed state, either by necessity or
choice, which result in its own set of tradeoffs:

-   Types with neither of the above properties _cannot support unformed state_.
-   Some types may elect to not support it as that may result in a better API

>     design for that specific type.

Reviewer 2: These two bullets don't seem to be describing the set of tradeoffs for not having unformed state, they seem to just be repeating "by necessity or choice."

Author: Yeah, reworded.

Author: Done -- the two cases are now distinguished rather than restated: types with neither property cannot support an unformed state at all, and types that could support one may still decline for API reasons. [Goals and use cases](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/pull/5913/files#diff-1249dfd7505dbbfc67e4fbb67e8ff0f985b8b993258d46479305c557edc2a6f2R233)

We will illustrate the design of unformed state with examples in each of the
three categories that support unformed state. We will also use multiple examples
within a category to surface interesting choices about how to approach unformed
state in that category.

We start with category (1), as our examples there are two important primitive

> types: a non-owning pointer `T*` and `bool`. For the non-owning pointer `T*`

Reviewer 2: Text has awkward extra words. Maybe?
```suggestion
Our examples for category (1) are two important primitive
types: a non-owning pointer `T*` and `bool`. For the non-owning pointer `T*`
```

Carbon expects the null value to be invalid. And for bool objects, we expect to
have an entire byte of state, and so have a great deal of flexibility as only
two states will be valid.

For category (2), the canonical example is an owning pointer type similar to
C++'s `std::unique_ptr`:

```carbon
// Original type, prior to adding support for unformed state.
class OwningPtr(T:! type) {
  var ptr: T*;

  fn destroy [ref self: Self]() {
    // Note: we don't want to do this if `self` is unformed.
    SomeDeallocationFunction(self.ptr);
  }
}
```

Here, because we are building on top of the more primitive `T*`, we will also
illustrate _re-using_ unformed state of a member to implement a containing
type's unformed state.

And lastly, for category (3), we consider both the primitive type `i32` with a
trivial destructor for all states, and something like an

> `Optional(OwningPtr(T))` with an interesting destructor in some states.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
`Optional(OwningPtr(T))` (ignoring niche optimizations) with an interesting destructor in some states.
```
I was thinking that Optional kinda transports the category of its internal type up to its own category at first, but that's because I am trained to consider niche optimizations

# Proposal

The largest constraint for how to model this comes from the checking we would
like to perform. We suggest at the highest level three tiers of enforcement:

1. Compile-time checking when there is either a use of an unformed variable or
   dead code that _would_ use the variable unformed if not dead (analogous to
   Clang's `-Wsometimes-uninitialized`).
2. Cheap, local run-time checking for use of unformed variables whenever

>    possible beyond the compile time checks.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
2. Implicit and cheap, local run-time checking for use of unformed variables
   whenever possible, if the compile time checks are not sufficient.
```

for this feature. So we propose a system that hides the flow sensitivity here,
retaining just enough of its functionality for our purposes. If Carbon ever
develops more rich flow sensitive typing, it may be reasonable to work to
integrate these further.

There are three main components to the proposal:

-   Interfaces to identify the existence of an unformed state and initialize
    objects using it.
-   A special type for use when an object might be in an unformed state.
-   The flow sensitive restrictions on how an object in an unformed state can be
    used.

## Declaring an unformed state for a type

First, we'll introduce interfaces for opting a type into having an unformed
state, defining the subset of the object that participates in its unformed
state, and having some way of initializing objects to this state. Types do this
by implementing an interface from the prelude:

```carbon
interface UnformedInit {
  let StructT:! type;
  fn Op() -> StructT;
}

interface UnformedInvalid {
  let StructT:! type;
  let Value:! StructT;
}
final impl forall [T:! UnformedInvalid] T as UnformedInit {
  where StructT = T.StructT;
  fn Op() -> StructT {

>     return T.Value;

Reviewer: I think we'll eventually need a constraint that `StructT` is copyable in order for this to type-check. Though maybe that belongs in `UnformedInvalid` instead of here.

Hm, actually, presumably even `UnformedInit` needs copyability for `StructT` since we're going to be copying those fields into the `Self` type rather than initializing it in place. Or... we could say that `UnformedInit.Op` actually returns `{-> .a: A, -> .b: B, ...}`, so initializes the chosen fields in-place? Or maybe it returns `MaybeUnformed(Self)`?

Author: Hmm, I think your struct form return is really the right answer. Let's the implementation do the mapping into the fields of `MaybeUnformed(T)`.

How do we turn a struct type into a struct form? Just `form(StructT)`?

Reviewer: I don't know if we have a syntax to convert a struct type to a struct form. @josh11b

Author: I've switched this to have a comment that explains this and uses `form(StructT)` purely as a placeholder.

two fundamental approaches to unformed state that a type may elect to use:
either an _invalid_ state that it can distinguish from its valid states, or a
_noop_ state that can be assigned-to and destroyed, but where the destructor can
be omitted if desired. For these two categories, types should nominate a
specific constant value to use.

We expect some code to end up falling back to unsafe code during initialization,
especially around C++ interop or during a migration from existing C++ API
designs. In these cases, we expect the compiler to automatically do some amount
of hardening to prevent any bugs in that unsafe code from being as easily
exploited, for example
[Clang's trivial auto variable initialization](https://clang.llvm.org/docs/ClangCommandLineReference.html#cmdoption-clang-ftrivial-auto-var-init).

Beyond this, we expose interfaces that allow types to _customize_ any runtime
hardening that is especially valuable or benefits from specific values when
falling back to unsafe initialization:

```carbon
interface UnformedHardenInit {
  require impls UnformedInit;
  let StructT:! type;
  fn Op() -> StructT;
}

> interface UnformedHarden {

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
interface UnformedHardenInvalid {
```

After reading the future works, and digesting this, I found myself having to convince myself that `UnformedHarden` was indeed requiring the unformed state to be _an invalid one_, and the future work is leaving open space for an `UnformedHardenNoop` or something else in the future.

So maybe it would be clearer to put that symmetry (if I have it right) in the interface name

Author: No, the goal is not that `UnformedHarden` requires the state to be invalid. This is supposed to be composable with either `UnformedInvalid` or `UnformedNoop`.

If the type implements `UnformedInvalid`, then the hardened state must also be invalid. If the type implements `UnformedNoop`, then the hardened state must also be a no-op state. You can't mix an invalid hardened state with a no-op unformed state or vice-versa.

I've tried to add words to clarify this.

Reviewer 5: Thanks. The wording does clarify things.

Though it does leave open a footgun for developers to get it wrong. One way to close that might be to add a `HardenedValue` constant to `UnformedInvalid` and `UnformedNoop` which default to `()` and it's something other than an empty tuple then it's used in place of `Value` when hardening is desired.

Author: Kept the name deliberately: `UnformedHarden` has to compose with either category, so a `UnformedNoop` type must harden to a no-op state and only a `UnformedInvalid` type must harden to an invalid one. Both rules are now stated explicitly, rather than left for a reader to work out: [consistency rules](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/pull/5913/files#diff-1249dfd7505dbbfc67e4fbb67e8ff0f985b8b993258d46479305c557edc2a6f2R836).

Your `HardenedValue` suggestion is recorded rather than dropped: [Folding the hardened value into `UnformedInvalid` and `UnformedNoop`](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/pull/5913/files#diff-1249dfd7505dbbfc67e4fbb67e8ff0f985b8b993258d46479305c557edc2a6f2R1481). It is rejected only because a type that wants a hardened value but no unformed state would have to claim one to get it, and it is the alternative to revisit if the consistency rules prove hard to follow in practice.

  let StructT:! type;
  let Value:! StructT;
}
final impl forall [T:! UnformedHarden] T as UnformedHardenInit {
  where StructT = T.StructT;
  fn Op() -> StructT {
    return T.Value;
  }
}
```

The `UnformedHardenInit.StructT` type has similar restrictions as
`UnformedInit.StructT` -- its fields must be a subset of the types fields, each
a compatible-with type. Further, the `UnformedHardenInit.StructT` must also be a

> superset of the fields in `UnformedInit.StructT`. We refer to _hardening_ of an

Reviewer: Is it OK for the hardened build mode to use a different representation in the fields in `UnformedInit.StructT` than the representation that `UnformedInit` would use, or is the goal here only to allow additional fields to have values specified?

Author: My goal was to let it have a different, but compatible representation. Although that may not have much utility. They're still fields of `T`, and each type has to be compatible with fields of `T`. And you can't access the fields (or the types used) from here. Reads always go through `MaybeUnformed(T)` and that in turn through the non-hardening struct.

Reviewer: I guess I'm worried about something like:
* A pointer type says its unformed value is `0`
* We use that value for detecting whether it's unformed
* It then says that its hardened value is some other bit pattern that's in some way better for hardening purposes

... and our "is it unformed" detection then fails to detect that a hardened unformed value is in fact unformed.

It'd be nice if we could make that kind of bug impossible, by ensuring that the hardened unformed state and the non-hardened unformed state are somehow consistent with each other.

Author: This is what the `match_first` impls for `IsUnformed` provide when using the `UnformedInvalid` and `UnformedHarden` interfaces. It ensures when the harden interface is implemented, it is included in the `InUnformed` implementation.

The only way to write this bug is to use the lower level `UnformedInit` and `UnformedHardenInit` interfaces, manually implementing both, and then manually implementing `IsUnformed` incorrectly.

I don't really see a way to preclude that, but it at least seems like the well lit path doesn't end up there?

The challenge with making the unformed and hardened states required to be consistent is if the _value_ used in the non-hardened case is lower cost but potentially less secure. In that case you want the value to differ between the two -- that's the whole point. The place where this comes up are things like indices where zero is a good, cheap unformed value, but happens to be "valid" and risky from a security perspective and so hardening prefers to set some other value like `INT_MIN`. Not expecting this to be common at all, but wanted to leave that flexibility in the design.

Reviewer: Hm. There's something that's not working well for me in this description: we talk about an object having "an unformed state" / "its unformed state" / "the unformed state" rather than having a set of unformed states, which to my reading implies that the thing that `UnformedHarden` gives you must either be consistent with what `UnformedInit` gives you (on the subset of fields that `UnformedInit` initializes) or is *not* an unformed state.

I think we don't have the terminology quite right, particularly about whether a type has a singular unformed state or a set of unformed states. If we want `UnformedHardenInit` to provide an unformed state, but not necessarily one that's consistent with the representation that `UnformedInit` provides, then the latter is not providing "the unformed state", just one possible unformed state, which means that the impl of `IsUnformed` in terms of the `UnformedInvalid` state isn't necessarily right, as there may be other unformed states. But if instead we want there to be a singular unformed state, then the state that an uninitialized variable is initialized to is *not* necessarily an unformed state (it won't be one in a hardened build), making the terminology there confusing, along with the name `IsUnformed`.

Perhaps we could use different words for the set of possible representations that an uninitialized variable can be in, versus the state that `UnformedInit` puts the object into? That might help to clarify that `IsUnformed` detects the former, not the latter.

> This is what the `match_first` impls for `IsUnformed` provide when using the `UnformedInvalid` and `UnformedHarden` interfaces. It ensures when the harden interface is implemented, it is included in the `InUnformed` implementation.

I don't think that is a complete solution. For example, if a type provides an `UnformedInvalid` impl and an `UnformedHardenInit` impl, and the latter doesn't produce a state that's compatible with the one that `UnformedInvalid` computes, then you would use the second impl from the `match_first`, which does the wrong thing for a hardened value. (I think I'd be fine with rejecting that set of `impl`s if there's a good way to do so.)

Do we expect the "hardened" state to be global, or could it vary between (say) packages in the same program? Do we actually need two sets of interfaces, and an `or` in the impl of `IsUnformed`, or could we instead have a single `UnformedInvalid` interface that sometimes produces a hardened value based on the build configuration?

Author: The terminology is fixed, which is what the confusion was. A type has an unformed representation _set_; `UnformedInit` and `UnformedHardenInit` each name a particular value in it; and `IsUnformed` tests membership in the set rather than equality with either value. That is what makes it correct for a type to harden to a representation it would not otherwise write: [Hardening the unformed state](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/pull/5913/files#diff-1249dfd7505dbbfc67e4fbb67e8ff0f985b8b993258d46479305c557edc2a6f2R796).

Your "I'd be fine with rejecting that set of impls if there's a good way to do so" is still open, and I have said so rather than papered over it. The combination is declared ill-formed but we have no way to detect it, and the two candidate fixes are named: [open question](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/pull/5913/files#diff-1249dfd7505dbbfc67e4fbb67e8ff0f985b8b993258d46479305c557edc2a6f2R852).

Your other question here -- whether the hardened state is global or could vary between packages in the same program -- is not addressed anywhere. Leaving this thread open for it.

unformed value as setting its fields to the result of `UnformedHardenInit.Op`,
and any additional initialization done by the compiler for security in the face
of unsafe code. This hardening only occurs to unformed or uninitialized objects,
never to well formed ones, and there is no restriction on whether both
`UnformedInit.Op` and `UnformedHardenInit.Op` are called or only one. Note that
these hardening interfaces should not be relied on and shouldn't replace broad
automatic initialization, but can allow types to specifically add extra
hardening where it is most useful, and surface if there is an especially

> beneficial value to use.

Reviewer: Do we automatically provide a default implementation of `UnformedHardenInit` for `UnformedInit` types, that initializes any fields not in `UnformedInit.StructT` to their `UnformedHardenInit` state?

(Also do we automatically provide a default implementation of `UnformedInit` for types that have at least one `UnformedInit` member?)

Author: I wasn't diving into automatic synthesis here, but agree we want some amount of it. Added an explicit future work.

We also propose an interface that can be used when `UnformedInvalid` is
implemented to test for the unformed state:

```carbon
interface IsUnformed {
  require impls UnformedInvalid;

  // The type of `self` will be clarified below.

>   fn Op[self: ???]() -> bool;

Reviewer 5: Is this `???` a `Core.MaybeUnformed(T)`?

That type is used directly below in this codeblock, and not clarified until 2 sections later, so maybe it should just be written out, and the comment can point to "A special type to operate on potentially unformed objects"?

Or should the other ones in this block also be `???`s?

Author: I just forgot to replace `???` with `Core.MaybeUnformed`.

}

match_first {
impl forall [T:! UnformedInvalid & UnformedHarden] T as IsUnformed {

>   fn Op[self: Core.MaybeUnformed(T)]() -> bool {

Reviewer 2: Seems inconsistent to use `???` in line 332, but `Core.MaybeUnformed(T)` in line 337, when I think they are supposed to be the same type.

Author: Yeah, I just missed one, fixed.

               == T.(UnformedHarden.Value);
  }
}

impl forall [T:! UnformedInvalid] T as IsUnformed {
  fn Op[self: Core.MaybeUnformed(T)]() -> bool {
    return (self as T.StructT) == T.Value;
  }
}
}
```

We suggest providing blanket `impl`s for types that implement `UnformedInvalid`
that test for that invalid state, and for types that implement both
`UnformedInvalid` and `UnformedHarden` that test for either of those states.
This has an implication that the state used by `UnformedHarden` cannot be a
valid state for the type. Types can customize the implementation of `IsUnformed`
in the usual way for interfaces, but those need to uphold the contract of
definitively testing for an object being in an unformed (and potentially
hardened) state.

**Future work**: Eventually, we should design a more comprehensive system to
expose invalid states, bit patterns, etc., in order to facilitate stashing more
bits into types for discriminants and other tools. At that point, we can look at
more powerful ways of expressing both the basic invalid state and any
invalid+hardened state.

**Future work:** We might want to additionally support types opting into

> hardening _without_ supporting an unformed state. If that proves motivating, we

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
**Future work:** We might want to additionally support types opting into
hardening _without_ supporting an invalid unformed state. If that proves motivating, we
```
Right?

Author: No, see discussion above on `UnformedHardenInvalid`.

would either need a separate interface that is only used for hardening and
doesn't confer any unformed state semantics, or we would need to split the
hardening aspect of UnformedHarden apart into such an interface. Currently, the

> suggestion is to have UnformedHarden be a superset because we expect this to be

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
hardening aspect of `UnformedHarden` apart into such an interface. Currently, the
suggestion is to have `UnformedHarden` be a superset because we expect this to be
```

the common case for types where an explicit hardening state is desired, and
separating it from UnformedInit would largely require types to implement two
things. In other words, we expect the blanket impl of UnformedInit in terms of

> UnformedHarden to be a relatively common case.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
things. In other words, we expect the blanket impl of `UnformedInit` in terms of
`UnformedHarden` to be a relatively common case.
```

## `unsafe as`, `unsafe adapt`, and raw storage

We introduce the idea of _unsafe conversions_ in order to use the above tools
effectively. These extend the conversion model of explicit and implicit
conversions:

```carbon
interface UnsafeAs(T:! type) {
  fn Convert[self: Self]() -> T;
}

interface As(T:! type) {
  extend impl as UnsafeAs(T);
}

interface ImplicitAs(T:! type) {

>   extend impl as As(T);

Reviewer 2: I don't think we should allow `UnsafeAs` to differ from `As` when they are both defined. `extend final impl as` is used to define `ImplicitAs` in proposal #5337 for this reason.
```suggestion
  extend final impl as UnsafeAs(T);
}

interface ImplicitAs(T:! type) {
  extend final impl as As(T);
```

}
```

Much as implicit conversions use `ImplicitAs`, and explicit conversions with the
as keyword use `As`, _unsafe conversions_ are written `<expr> unsafe as T`, and

> use the `UnsafeAs` interface implementation to perform the conversion.

Reviewer: The choice of syntax here seems interesting enough that I've factored it out to https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/issues/5930.

Reviewer: Now #5930 is decided, I think it'd be useful to include a link to it here.

Author: Done, also added an overview to the alternatives section.

We combine this with the concept of
[adapting a type](/docs/design/generics/details.md#adapting-types) in an unsafe
way by modifying the adapt declaration with the unsafe keyword. Such an adaptor
has all the same properties as normal adapters, but the conversions between the

> types are only available with unsafe as. These adapters can then explicitly

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
types are only available with `unsafe as`. These adapters can then explicitly
```

implement other conversion interfaces, but potentially do so _conditionally_ or
impose other restrictions such as only allowing them in one direction.

**Open question:** It isn't clear how implementing another conversion interface
would work, but this is an issue already with adapters: how do you make an
adapter conversion _implicit_? There is already an implementation of `As`, so
implementing `ImplicitAs` would be an error -- it would be subsumed by the
`extend impl as`. And even if you _could_, you couldn't actually write the

> Convert function as that would require using the synthesized one.

Reviewer 5: Didn't https://docs.carbon-lang.dev/proposals/p5337.html#proposal make this possible? The `ImplicitAs` interface comes with a blanket impl of `As`, so if you implement `ImplicitAs` you opt into that blanket impl. But the existing `As` impl would be a specialization that takes priority?

For the second part, if you specialize `UnsafeAs` for your type, then you can specify the `Convert` function you want. The blanket impl of `As` and `ImplicitAs` should find that?

I think none of this works in the toolchain right now because builtin conversions (like from adapt) [don't surface as `As`](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/issues/5750) but I think it's supposed to?

Author: > Didn't [docs.carbon-lang.dev/proposals/p5337.html#proposal](https://docs.carbon-lang.dev/proposals/p5337.html#proposal) make this possible? The `ImplicitAs` interface comes with a blanket impl of `As`, so if you implement `ImplicitAs` you opt into that blanket impl. But the existing `As` impl would be a specialization that takes priority?

But the blanket impl is *final*, and so it can't be specialized. =/

> For the second part, if you specialize `UnsafeAs` for your type, then you can specify the `Convert` function you want. The blanket impl of `As` and `ImplicitAs` should find that?
> 
> I think none of this works in the toolchain right now because builtin conversions (like from adapt) [don't surface as `As`](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/issues/5750) but I think it's supposed to?

Yeah. But I do tihnk we need something here. That said, see discussion with Josh and Richard where I think after a live discussion with Richard I've come up with a plausible suggested direction here and added that to the proposal.

> Convert function as that would require using the synthesized one.

Reviewer 2: I agree this is not currently allowed. We could maybe support this case with:

```
class C { ... }
class A {
  adapt C;
  impl as ImplicitAs(C) = As(C);
}
```

But right now the only thing allowed after `impl as`...`=` is an adapter class that implements the same interface, see https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/blob/trunk/docs/design/generics/details.md#use-case-defining-an-impl-for-use-by-other-types .

Reviewer: Would
```
impl as ImplicitAs(C) = C;
```
work? `C` is a compatible type that implements `ImplicitAs(C)`.

Author: I like the first one a bit more than the second, because we can't have a conversion to `C` while we're defining conversions to `C`...

Chatted a bit with @zygoloid about this live, and came up with the idea of _explicitly_ extending the blanket `impl` when `impl`-ing the interface that produces the blanket impl. That seems like the case which we *can* make work (because we can use the explicit extension of the blanket `impl` to insist that we see it and everyone else sees it too), and ensure that our extension is coherent.

It does mean that we have yet another thing that makes negative constraints bad, but that seems OK.

I've added a description of this to the proposal, PTAL and let me know if this direction makes sense?

It raises some more open questions around `final` that I've added. Those at least seem more tactical questions we need to think through and less open-ended "how do we want this to work".

Reviewer 2: Fine with me. It seems to work with `final`, as you observed.

Author: Done -- `extend impl` within an `impl` is proposed in [Unsafe adapters](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/pull/5913/files#diff-1249dfd7505dbbfc67e4fbb67e8ff0f985b8b993258d46479305c557edc2a6f2R387), with the interaction with `final` left as an open question.

conversion, and require users to explicitly write any of the main conversion
implementations desired.

One important use case we imagine for these semantics is working with the raw,
underlying storage of an object by defining an unsafe adapter for its type. This
proposal doesn't try to define the specifics of this, that is expected to be
part of a subsequent proposal that covers both storage and initialization of
storage.

**Future work:** Fully define how raw storage is represented for objects and the
relevant operations on it.

## A special type to operate on potentially unformed objects

Next, we introduce a new, synthesized type that models an object of type T that
might be fully initialized or might be initialized to an unformed state:
`Core.MaybeUnformed(T)`:

```carbon
class MaybeUnformed(T:! type) {
  unsafe adapt T;
}

impl forall [T:! type] T as ImplicitAs(MaybeUnformed(T)) {
  fn Convert[self: Self]() -> MaybeUnformed(T) {
    // Not clear how to write this, see open question above.
  }
}
```

This type provides an API subset of `T`, somewhat analogous to how `const T`
works. Rather than the fields being `const`-qualified, only the subset of the

> fields in the UnformedInit.StructT type are available. All of the functions and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
fields in the `UnformedInit.StructT` type are available. All of the functions and
```

> methods on T are available, but functions that safely operate on unformed

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
methods on `T` are available, but functions that safely operate on unformed
```

objects of type `T` must accept `Core.MaybeUnformed(T)` to signify this to the
caller and enforce that their definition doesn't make assumptions about the

> object being fully initialized. For example, this lets us describe the Self type

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
object being fully initialized. For example, this lets us describe the `Self` type
```

used in the `IsUnformed` interface for querying:

```carbon
interface IsUnformed {
  requires Self impls UnformedInit;
  fn Op[self: Core.MaybeUnformed(Self)]() -> bool;
}
```

There is also a blanket `impl` for `IsUnformed` that forwards:

```carbon
final impl forall [T:! IsUnformed] Core.MaybeUnformed(T) as IsUnformed {
  fn Op[self: Self]() -> bool {
    // We can call `T`'s implementation on `self` due to it taking
    // its object parameter as `Core.MaybeUnformed(Self)` which is our `Self`.
    return self.(T.(IsUnformed.Op))();
  }
}
```

Types with an unformed state will either need to implement `IsUnformed`,
typically by implementing `UnformedInvalid`, or provide implementations of
`Core.Assign` and the destructor, if present, using `Core.MaybeUnformed(T)`.
When assignment or destruction directly use `Core.MaybeUnformed(T)` they
directly handle the unformed state, and any of their implementation details of
assignment and destruction might also need to use this type. Otherwise, when
those operations simply accept `Self`, the compiler will require an `IsUnformed`
implementation, use it to test for unformed state, and adjust the operation to

> initialize (rather than assign) or skip destruction.

Reviewer 2: Logic in this paragraph is a bit hard to follow. From first principles, I think the situation is:

* If you implement `IsUnformed` you may then:
  * implement `Core.Assign` and the destructor taking `Core.MaybeUnformed(T)`, and they will be used whether or not the object is currently in unformed state
  * implement `Core.Assign` and the destructor taking `Self`, and they will only be used for well formed object, possibly by testing `IsUnformed` first.
* If you don't implement `IsUnformed` then you must implement `Core.Assign` and the destructor taking `Core.MaybeUnformed(T)`.

The formulation at the end of the paragraph is a bit less convoluted, and makes it clearer that you could do both implement `IsUnformed` and use `Core.MaybeUnformed(T)` in assignment and destruction.

If the type has an unformed state:
* If `Core.Assign` or destructor take `Self`, then `IsUnformed` must be implemented. In this case, the compiler will test for unformed state before calling assignment/destruction and perform initialization (instead of assignment)/skip destruction instead of calling the functions taking `Self`.
* Otherwise `Core.Assign` and the destructor may take `Core.MaybeUnformed(T)` and be expected to handle unformed states on their own.

Author: Yeah, sorry about this paragraph....

Tried writing it based on the direct articulation?

But maybe there is an even simpler way to structure...

Author: Restructured, and the destructor half of your case analysis went away entirely. Under #7362 the signature of `Destroy.Op` is fixed by the interface, so a type cannot write a destructor against `Core.MaybeUnformed(Self)` even if it wanted to -- destruction became a rule of the language, and assignment is the only thing a type opts into: [Assignment and destruction](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/pull/5913/files#diff-1249dfd7505dbbfc67e4fbb67e8ff0f985b8b993258d46479305c557edc2a6f2R743).

The branch of your enumeration that had no answer is now stated: a `UnformedNoop` type has no `IsUnformed` to test, so its assignment implementation runs unconditionally, which is sound because its unformed state is a valid value.

Unformed objects can be directly created from the unformed initialization

> struct:

Reviewer 2: Is this built in, or something the user provides?
```suggestion
Unformed objects can be directly created from the unformed initialization
struct, using this built-in impl of `ImplicitAs`:
```

```carbon
impl forall [T:! UnformedInit]
    T.(UnformedInit.StructT)
    as ImplicitAs(Core.MaybeUnformed(T)) {
  fn Convert[self: Self]() -> Core.MaybeUnformed(T) {
    // Initialize the fields of `T` that are part of `StructT`.

>   }

Reviewer 2: This conversion seems a bit dangerous. It seems like it opens the door to creating a value where `IsUnformed` returns `false`, but not all of the fields of `T` have been initialized.

Author: I think I'm missing how...

This is going from the struct type to `Core.MaybeUnformed(T)`, not from `T` itself?

And this should produce a value that `IsUnformed` is required to return `true` for? That at least is my goal -- this is supposed to produce an actually unformed value with type `Core.MaybeUnformed(T)`.

Reviewer 2: It seems expensive to check that the result causes `IsUnformed` to return `true` every time this happens, but the invariants of the system rely on that.

Author: Flagging this one as not fully resolved rather than claiming otherwise. The text now names the obligation -- whether the result is one that the type's own `IsUnformed` recognizes is the type's contract to keep -- but nothing verifies it, and you are right that checking it on every conversion would be too expensive to do: [the conversion](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/pull/5913/files#diff-1249dfd7505dbbfc67e4fbb67e8ff0f985b8b993258d46479305c557edc2a6f2R626).

Worth noting the hazard got slightly easier to hit, not harder: the conversion is now spelled as an `ImplicitAs` `impl`. If that is the wrong trade, restricting it to an explicit `As` would be the smaller change.

}
```

We also allow types to document that they have checked the type's invariants

> outside of what the typesystem can prove by using the unsafe as operation. For

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
outside of what the typesystem can prove by using the `unsafe as` operation. For
```

example:

> 1. Convert a fully initialized `Core.MaybeUnformed(T)` object back to `T`.

Reviewer: What's the intended workflow for transitioning from `MaybeUnformed(T)` to `T`? It seems like in general you'd need to first use `unsafe as` to convert to `T`, and then initialize. That suggests to me that perhaps the idiomatic thing isn't converting a fully-initialized `MaybeUnformed(T)` to `T`, but it's converting a `MaybeUnformed(T)` to an unsafe maybe-half-initialized `T`, then initializing that `T` before anyone else gets to see it.

Maybe there should be a member function on `MaybeUnformed(T)` to initialize it from an expression that can be used to initialize a `T`, that returns `self` as a reference to a `T`?

Author: My intent is that you convert it into raw storage and initialize that raw storage with a `T`. But we don't have a way of dealing with raw storage yet.

We can't easily do a member function here, because that would require moving the argument into the storage. We need a language level construct to initialize raw storage "in place". (Essentially, placement new.)

2. Convert an unformed `Core.MaybeUnformed(T)` object to its underlying raw
   storage.

Both of these convert _reference expressions_, and continue to refer to the same
underlying storage or object. Because these are all _compatible_, they can also
be used to convert pointers between these types.

The first is useful when the `Core.MaybeUnformed(T)` object is in fact fully

> initialized to continue handling that case. It can also be used when the

Reviewer 2: I don't know what you mean here. Could you be specific about "the first" and "that case"? By "the first" I think you mean "Convert a fully initialized `Core.MaybeUnformed(T)` object back to `T`," but that is redundant with what you say after.

Author: Tried to adjust the wording to make clear -- it does mean the first conversion listed above? Not sure what the redundancy is... It may be a bit of a trivial use case, I'm mostly mentioning it to contrast it with the case where the unformed state can just become the object (like for an integer).

Author: Done by deletion. The numbered list and the two paragraphs that restated its items are gone, replaced by a single paragraph covering both conversions: [`Core.MaybeUnformed(T)`](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/pull/5913/files#diff-1249dfd7505dbbfc67e4fbb67e8ff0f985b8b993258d46479305c557edc2a6f2R498).

unformed state is arranged to be a valid initialization of the object and the
operation is merely reifying it as fully initialized.

The second is useful when the `Core.MaybeUnformed(T)` object is in fact in an
unformed state and a new object will be initialized into its existing raw
storage (because the destructor need not be run for such an object). The

> language mechanisms needed for raw storage and initializing it this will be part

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
language mechanisms needed for raw storage and initializing it will be part
```

> language mechanisms needed for raw storage and initializing it this will be part

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
language mechanisms needed for initializing raw storage will be part
```

of specifying raw storage in a future proposal.

**Future work:** we should consider adding `impl`s to `Core.MaybeUnformed(T)`
when `IsUnformed` is implemented, ideally matching the those used for optional
types. This should allow `Core.MaybeUnformed(T)` to participate in all the
language-level affordances we provide for optional types as they are designed. A
key goal should be that this allows using `Core.MaybeUnformed(T)` without any

> unsafe operations through tools like if let.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
unsafe operations through tools like `if let`.
```

## Flow-sensitive restrictions on objects known to be unformed

Finally, we tie the previous two components together with flow-sensitive
restrictions on how objects known to be unformed can be used.

An object is known to be in an unformed state when it is declared without an
explicit initializer, such as:

```carbon
var object: SomeType;
```

**Future work:** We also expect to add operations to Carbon that put objects
into this state without a declaration, as we would like to use unformed state
for non-destructively-moved-from objects as well, but those will come in
subsequent and separate proposals.

> Because object above is known to be in an unformed state, we restrict how it may

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because `object` above is known to be in an unformed state, we restrict how it may
```

> be used subsequently: it be used freely with the special type

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
be used subsequently: it may be used freely with the special type
```

> be used subsequently: it be used freely with the special type

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
be used subsequently: it may be used freely with the special type
```

> `Core.MaybeUnformed(T)`, but may only be used as the type `T` after it has been

Reviewer: How does one use `object` with this special type? What's the syntax for that? (Do you just name it -- requiring us to do the control flow analysis online?)

Author: You just name it. I think I realized the clearer way to state this to avoid there *actually* be flow-sensitive typing: the type is always `T`, but the only valid operation is the implicit (form aware) conversion to `Core.MaybeUnformed(T)` until we do at least one of those for a `ref`-parameter, and that one is required to initialize the object fully making other operations valid.

But because the type is always `T`, you can't get a *deduced* `Core.MaybeUnformed(T)` or anything. I've tried to clarify this.

used as a reference expression of type `Core.MaybeUnformed(T)` to something
other than the type's own destructor. That first reference expression to the

> object is required to initialize it fully.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
used as a reference parameter of type `Core.MaybeUnformed(T)` to a call
other than the type's own destructor. That first call is required to initialize
the object fully.
```

There is an escape hatch available here, by doing `unsafe as` to convert from
`Core.MaybeUnformed(T)` to `T`, including for a reference expression or in the
pointee type of a pointer. If known to be in the unformed state, this might
trigger using the `UnsafeHardenInit.Op` return to mitigate any bugs in the
subsequent (unsafe) use of an unformed value with the full type's API and
potentially accessing uninitialized memory. That hardening is expected to be

> handled by the compiler and language automatically.

Reviewer 2: Note that the hardening to do might be on an object whose value was set quite far from the `unsafe as` when the `unsafe as` is done on pointer types instead of the object itself.

Author: Yep.

The way I imagine this working is often to do the hardening defensively when the pointer to the object escapes whatever context can see the initial initialization, because we *could* end up with a later `unsafe as` like this...

Reviewer 2: Do you say that anywhere?

Author: No -- it was only ever in this thread. Now in the proposal: [hardening through a pointer](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/pull/5913/files#diff-1249dfd7505dbbfc67e4fbb67e8ff0f985b8b993258d46479305c557edc2a6f2R867).

It is followed by a `Future work` note saying where hardening is applied can only be pinned down once the safety model, its flow checking, and declared effects exist, since "the context that can see its initialization" is a flow-sensitive judgment. Until then the rule above it is an expectation rather than a specification.

This results in a very restrictive model that requires either initialization,
explicit code handling unformed values with `Core.MaybeUnformed`, or `unsafe`.
However, we suggest this restrictive model be considered _experimental_ and be
revisited based on experience as it may be necessary to make the escape hatch
occur automatically in more cases, especially around C++ interop. We also have
empirical evidence that the security implications of unsafe initialization are
much more realistic to address through automated measures such as the hardening
interface and automatic zeroing of storage in specific cases, making it more
reasonable to consider relaxing the safety target here.

## Putting all this together for our use cases

Let's start with `bool` and `T*`. Here, we'll use class types that implement
both in terms of private integers for illustration purposes, but the expectation

> is that practice these would likely be directly provided by builtin operations.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
is that in practice these would likely be directly provided by builtin operations.
```

```carbon
// Imagined pseudo-implementation of `bool` for illustration.
class Bool {
  fn True() -> Bool { return {.value = 1}; }
  fn False() -> Bool { return {.value = 0}; }

  private var value: i8;
}

impl Bool as Core.UnformedInvalid
    where .StructT = {.value: i8}
    and   .Value   = {.value = -1} {}

// Imagined pseudo-implementation of `T*` for illustration.
class Ptr(T:! type) {
  private var value: i64;
}

impl forall [T:! type] Ptr(T) as Core.UnformedInvalid
    where .StructT = {.value: i64}
    and   .Value   = {.value = 0} {}

// For illustration, we also make pointers have a hardened constant
// with the "infinite scream" value from LLVM's pattern initialization.
//
// Note that while there is a default `impl` of `UnformedInitConstant`,

> // the above `impl` will be used instead as it is more specialized.

Reviewer 5: `UnformedInitConstant` is not mentioned elsewhere but I am not sure what to suggest as I am not sure what this is saying about the `UnformedInvalid` impl above. The `UnformedHarden` would surely be used over it thanks to the `match_first`?

Author: sorry, `UnformedInitConstant` was the old name for `UnformedInvalid`. Switched.

impl forall [T:! type] Ptr(T) as Core.UnformedHarden
    where .StructT = {.value: i64}
    and   .Value   = {.value = 0xAAAA_AAAA_AAAA_AAAA} {}
```

Now let's build the `OwningPtr` version. This will build on the `Ptr(T)` above,
but demonstrate the different category of this type: it requires a non-trivial
destructor!

```carbon
class OwningPtr(T:! type) {
  private var ptr: Ptr(T);

  // With reflection, we could potentially provide an automatic
  // way of delegating to a member, but spelling it out for now.
  impl as Core.UnformedInvalid
      where .StructT = {.ptr: Core.MaybeUnformed(Ptr(T))}
      and .Value = {.ptr = Ptr(T).(UnformedInvalid.Value)} {}

  impl as Core.UnformedHarden
      where .StructT = {.ptr: Core.MaybeUnformed(Ptr(T))}
      and .Value = {.ptr = Ptr(T).(UnformedHarden.Value)} {}

  impl as Core.IsUnformed {
    fn [self: Core.MaybeUnformed(Self)]() -> bool {

>       // Note that `self.ptr` has type `Core.MaybeUnformed(PtrT))`, but

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      // Note that `self.ptr` has type `Core.MaybeUnformed(Ptr(T))`, but
```

      // that still allows us to call `.(Core.IsUnformed.Op)()`.
      return self.ptr.(Core.IsUnformed.Op)();
    }

>   }

Reviewer 5: Don't the two impls above provide this through the blanket impl? Why is it preferred to forward to `self.ptr`?

Author: The reason was never stated, which was the real problem. The blanket `impl` compares `StructT` values, and `OwningPtr`'s `StructT` field has type `Core.MaybeUnformed(Ptr(T))`, which has no `==`. Delegating to the member's own test is both possible and cheaper. Now said in a comment on the `impl`: [`OwningPtr as Core.IsUnformed`](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/pull/5913/files#diff-1249dfd7505dbbfc67e4fbb67e8ff0f985b8b993258d46479305c557edc2a6f2R1046).

  fn Reset[ref self: Core.MaybeUnformed(Self)](var rhs: OwningPtr(T)) {
    if (!self.ptr.(Core.IsUnformed.Op)()) {
      // This is a fully initialized object. Note that we could also
      // directly access the `ptr` field by way of `self`, but are using the
      // `unsafe as` here to illustrate its use in a case where it is
      // correct.
      let ref real_self: Self = self unsafe as Self;
      destroy(real_self);
    }

    // Imagined syntax to directly re-initialize storage,
    // not part of this proposal. `~rhs` is a destructive move.
    let ref storage: ??? = self unsafe as ???;
    raw_init storage = {.ptr = (~rhs).ptr};
  }

  // Note, the destructor can simply be declared as accepting `Self`.
  // This will require the test for unformed to be synthesized prior
  // to automatic calls to the destructor, and requires explicit

>   // destructor calls to do that test themselves.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  // destructor calls from MaybeUnformed(OwningPtr(T)) to do that test themselves.
```

They'd have to `unsafe as` as well.

  fn destroy[ref self: Self]() {
    SomeDeallocationFunction(self.ptr);
  }
}
```

Next, let's consider an integer where we _cannot_ test for unformed, but the
destructor is a no-op. We use a private member rather than adapting to make the
conversions a bit easier to read, but the effect should be the same.

```carbon
class Int(N:! IntLiteral) {
  private var value: MakeInt(N);

  // The unformed state can be empty because our destructor is trivial.
  impl as UnformedNoop where .StructT = {}
                       and   .Value   = {};

  // But we might harden the integer to zero.
  impl as UnformedHarden where .StructT = {.value: MakeInt(N)}
                         and   .Value   = {.value = (0 as Int(N)).value};

  impl as AssignWith(Int(N)) {

>     fn Op[ref self: Core.Unformed(Self)](rhs: Int(N)) {

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    fn Op[ref self: Core.MaybeUnformed(Self)](rhs: Int(N)) {
```
?

>     fn Op[ref self: Core.Unformed(Self)](rhs: Int(N)) {

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    fn Op[ref self: Core.MaybeUnformed(Self)](rhs: Int(N)) {
```

      // Nothing to do -- the destructor is always trivial. But this is
      // still the only method that can be called on an unformed object
      // to provide correctness checking.

      // Imagined syntax to directly re-initialize storage, not part of
      // this proposal
      let ref storage: ??? = self unsafe as ???;
      raw_init storage = {.value = rhs.value};
    }
  }
}
```

Last but not least, let's imagine an `OptionalOwningPtr(T)` where the optional
itself borrows the the unformed state of `OwningPtr(T)` as one of its _valid_
states, and so can't implement testing for being unformed directly. This still
requires a non-trivial destructor though.

```carbon
class OptionalOwningPtr(T:! type) {
  fn Make(var ptr: OwningPtr(T)) -> Self {
    return {.ptr = ~ptr};
  }
  fn MakeEmpty() -> Self {

>     return {.ptr = OwningPtr(T).(UnformedInvalid.Value)};

Reviewer 5: This might work here cuz there's only one field and it's part of `UnformedInvalid`'s `Value`, but in general this probably should be calling `UnformedInit.Op` right? It seems like it has some magic inside to construct the class from a subset of fields.

Author: I think `UnformedInit.Op` will likely use a struct-form return to avoid containing the magic.

The magic will come from initializing the subset of fields in a `Core.MaybeUnformed(T)` from that struct-form return. And that's in the compiler's purview.

Here, we're just short-circuiting because we can for this specific type.

Is there a comment that would help? Or is it important to show the raw struct-form return here?

Reviewer 5: IIUC the most general always-works thing to do here would be to call `UnformedInit.Op`. I will expect this code to be copied/cargo-culted as it is the initial demonstration of how to write this function, so I would personally prefer to write it in the general way. But it's not wrong then, either. A comment saying this doesn't always work might help future readers, but then that may be more confusing than just writing the more general thing idk. Mostly I am thinking about people coming here (or somewhere containing a copy of this) in the future for guidance on how to write such a thing and wanting to copy it.

Author: Ok, switched to the general form and a comment mentioning that it's equivalent to teh special case.

Author: Done -- `MakeEmpty` goes through `Core.UnformedInit.Op`, with a comment noting it works for any type with an unformed state and not just `OwningPtr(T)`: [`OptionalOwningPtr`](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/pull/5913/files#diff-1249dfd7505dbbfc67e4fbb67e8ff0f985b8b993258d46479305c557edc2a6f2R1122).

  }

  let PtrT:! type = Core.MaybeUnformed(OwningPtr(T));

  private var ptr: PtrT;

  // Note that isn't invalid, just a noop.
  impl as Core.UnformedNoop
      where .StructT = {.ptr: PtrT}
      and   .Value   = {.ptr = PtrT.(UnformedInvalid.Value)} {}

  fn Reset[ref self: Core.MaybeUnformed(Self)](var rhs: OwningPtr(T)) {
    // The destructor handles the unformed state itself.

>     self.destroy();

Reviewer 5: OwningPtr's destroy takes `Self` not `MaybeUnformed` so this needs to check and cast?

Author: no, this is calling `self`'s `destroy` function, which takes `Core.MaybeUnformed(Self)`. That does the check prior to calling `OwningPtr`'s `destroy`.

Reviewer 5: Ah right this is in OptionalOpeningPtr :+1:

    // Imagined syntax to directly re-initialize storage,
    // not part of this proposal. `~rhs` is a destructive move.
    let ref storage: ??? = self unsafe as ???;
    raw_init storage = {.ptr = (~rhs).ptr};
  }

  fn destroy[ref self: Core.MaybeUnformed(Self)]() {
    // We can directly access ptr as it is part of the unformed API subset.
    if (self.ptr.(Core.IsUnformed.Op)()) {
      return;

>     }

Reviewer 5: Is this an optimization to not call `self.IsUnformed()`? (or is it still spelt `self.(Core.IsUnformed.Op)()`?)

Author: It's still spelled the long way -- it's an interface impl, not a method.

Reviewer 5: Ah, well the thing I was really wondering was why `self.ptr.` and not just `self.`, but I guess this is a simple preference?

Author: The `self.ptr` versus `self` question turned out to have a real answer, which the proposal never gave. The blanket `impl` compares `StructT` values, and this type's `StructT` field has type `Core.MaybeUnformed(Ptr(T))`, which has no `==`, so the blanket `impl` does not apply here. That is now a comment on the `impl`: [`OwningPtr as Core.IsUnformed`](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/pull/5913/files#diff-1249dfd7505dbbfc67e4fbb67e8ff0f985b8b993258d46479305c557edc2a6f2R1046).

    // We know this is a fully initialized object, so this is safe.

>     let ref real_self: Self = self unsafe as Self;

Reviewer 5: `.ptr` is part of `MaybeUnformed(OptionalOwningPtr(T))`'s `UnformedInit.StructT` so we shouldn't need to cast to `Self` here and can just use `self.ptr` directly, no?

>     Assert(!real_self.ptr.(Core.IsUnformed.Op)());

Reviewer 5: This is exactly the above if, was it more different before or is it intended to repeat that?

    let ref real_ptr: OwningPtr(T) = real_self.ptr unsafe as OwningPtr(T);

>     real_ptr.destroy();

Reviewer 2: This code seems to be doing things in a redundant way. The code could be written more concisely (naturally?):
```suggestion
    if (!self.ptr.(Core.IsUnformed.Op)()) {
      (self.ptr unsafe as OwningPtr(T)).destroy();
    }
```

(and in the future this might be
```
    if let ref real_ptr: OwningPtr(T) = self.ptr {
      real_ptr.destroy();
    }
```
)

I suspect though that you are taking extra steps to show the different things you can do. It does make it seem like handling unformed state is going to require a lot of steps, though.

Author: Eh, was just walking through the steps. Yours is still better. =]

  }
}
```

All of these rely in their implementation details on a few more facilities that
are not part of this proposal but expected to come in future proposals:

-   Invoking the destructor on objects
-   Destructively moving objects
-   Turning an object into raw storage
-   Initializing raw storage with a new value

However, the underlying model for the unformed state hopefully makes sense in
isolation. In an effort to decompose a large number of interconnected topics,
we're starting off by setting up the unformed state details and will have
follow-up proposals to fill in these gaps.

# C++ interop

This feature has specific C++ interop implications that we want to spell out.

## C++ types and unformed state

First, we want to provide unformed state for as many C++ types as we can without
creating painful surprises for users with the behavior. Provided there isn't

> user-surprise, types with unformed state have significantly better ergonomics.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
user surprise, types with unformed state have significantly better ergonomics.
```

However, we can't use default heuristics to synthesize an unformed and _invalid_
state, and so our defaults and heuristics don't provide any `IsUnformed`
implementation.

The proposed initial rule for synthesizing an unformed state of a C++ type is if
one of the following applies:

-   If the type is trivially default constructible, then it implements
    `UnformedNoop` with an empty struct type and value. Note that we don't
    require a trivial destructor here, as even if technically non-trivial, it
    cannot correctly read any members. Carbon may elide calls to the destructor
    that C++ would make, but this seems reasonable for interop purposes.
-   If the type is default constructible and trivially _destroyable_, then the
    type implements `UnformedInit` with a struct type of all its fields and the

>     `Op` function returning a default constructed version of the type.

Reviewer 5: Why not `UnformedNoop`, as the dtor call can be omitted?

Author: Technically, the default constructed value might not be a compile time constant.

Beyond these defaults we can customize the behavior of specific types by
implementing their unformed state interfaces in wrapping Carbon code to select
specific values.

### C++ standard library types

We suggest aggressively defining unformed states for widely used vocabulary
types in the C++ standard library to provide the best possible ergonomics during
interop. For many vocabulary types, this will likely be handled by mapping the
type into a Carbon-native type such as C++ pointers to Carbon pointers, and
`std::unique_ptr` into whatever owning pointer Carbon has. For other standard
library types, this should be done in their wrapping Carbon code.

## Passing unformed objects into C++ code

C++ APIs that expect to initialize output parameters passed by reference or

> pointer won't have the Carbon unformed type annotations to identify them. We

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
pointer won't have the Carbon `Core.MaybeUnformed` type to identify them. We
```

propose in the non-strict safety modes of Carbon, that there is an implicit
`unsafe` cast in order to allow calling these APIs even with an unformed object
provided the API could legitimately initialize the type. After this cast, the

> object should be assumed well formed, as it would be normally.

Reviewer 5: I think this is saying that the following
```
var t: T;
F(t unsafe as ref T);
```
Would consider `t` to be initialized after.

The proposal doesn't say this AFAICT. It says `t` is initialized if passed to a fn that takes `ref MaybeUnformed(T)` (but not `MaybeUnformed(T)*`).

So two potential gaps here, I think:
- Does taking the address of the uninitialized `var` also make it considered as initialized? As most C++ out-params are going to be pointers.
- Does forming a reference expression to `T` also make it considered as initialized, or just a reference expression to `MaybeUnformed(T)`?

Reviewer 2: FYI, It would be `t unsafe as T` not `t unsafe as ref T`. `ref T` is not a type, and this specific conversion will preserve the category so it is enough that `t` is a reference expression. On the other hand, it might be `F(ref `...`)` if `F` takes a `ref` parameter, so this might end up being `F(ref t unsafe as T)`.

Author: I think the flow sensitive section does restrict this as it restricts the operation set.

Currently, I think even the above would be rejected. I think it has to be: `F((ref t as Core.MaybeUnformed(T)) unsafe as T)` ... which seems ... suboptimal.

We could build a wrapper to do the explicit escape:

```carbon
unsafe fn Escape[T:! type](bound ref obj: Core.MaybeUnformed(T)) -> ref T {
  return obj unsafe as T;
}
```

And then use it:

```carbon
var t: T;
F(unsafe Escape(ref t));
```

But it's not clear this is a great experience either.

Is it too ad-hoc to suggest `unsafe ref` instead of `ref` in this proposal to do this? Basically, `unsafe ref` would turn off the flow sensitive restrictions on unformed objects operation usage.

I suppose the down side is that we don't use `ref` for the object parameter, so this would only support non-methods. Personally, that works for me because methods I feel like are better situated to instead use `Core.MaybeUnformed(T)` themselves. Thoughts?

Reviewer: Perhaps we could allow the use of the name of a variable in an unformed state as the left operand of `unsafe as` in general? (In addition to allowing it to be implicitly converted to `MaybeUnformed(T)`.)

Author: > Perhaps we could allow the use of the name of a variable in an unformed state as the left operand of `unsafe as` in general? (In addition to allowing it to be implicitly converted to `MaybeUnformed(T)`.)

We could, it just feels like it'll be a bit surprising syntax wise:

```carbon
var t: T;
F(ref (t unsafe as T));
```

It seems strange to cast `t` to `T` right after declaring it with that type.

Relatedly, is this how we want `ref`-form-preserving `as`-style expressions (or other such expressions) to interact with `ref` markings on arguments? Do we need parentheses there? But those are all questions for `ref`, not unformed...

Reviewer: Hm. Yeah, I agree that `unsafe as T` is a bit surprising / strange.

In principle, a library function to do this seems like it could be reasonable. (Prior art for doing language-ish things like this in the library include the Rust `drop` function and C++ `std::move`.) I think it would currently look a bit worse than pictured above:
```carbon
var t: Cpp.T;
Cpp.T.Init(ref unsafe Core.Escape(ref t));
```
... which is a lot of extra syntax, not least because `ref` appears twice. But I think it might be reasonable to start with that; if we find there's sufficient pressure in practice, we could add an `unsafe ref`:
```carbon
var t: Cpp.T;
Cpp.T.Init(unsafe ref t);
```

Author: Went with @zygoloid's library function. `Core.Escape` is now declared rather than only used, so it is a proposal rather than a sketch: [Passing unformed objects into C++ code](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/pull/5913/files#diff-1249dfd7505dbbfc67e4fbb67e8ff0f985b8b993258d46479305c557edc2a6f2R1285).

Two gaps are called out in the text rather than closed. Marking `Escape` itself `unsafe` depends on the still-undecided meaning of `unsafe` on a `fn`. And @danakj's point that most C++ out-parameters are pointers is covered only by the general rule that `unsafe as` also applies in the pointee type of a pointer -- every worked example is still `ref`.

We expect the strict Carbon mode to include rejecting these without the
_explicit_ `unsafe` operation, to slowly move to all unsafe initialization being
marked explicitly in the source code.

As with the overall strict model, we suggest these rules to be considered
experimental and revisited if they are either too lax in the non-strict mode, or
problematic even in strict mode.

# Further details

## Expected standard type behavior

We expect integers, floating point numbers, pointers, and bool to all support
unformed states. Generally, we expect Core types in Carbon to provide unformed
state whenever there is a reasonable implementation strategy.

> We also specifically expect pointers and bool to implement IsUnformed, allowing

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We also specifically expect pointers and bool to implement `IsUnformed`, allowing
```

work to address how to allow types to control opting-in and opting-out of this
behavior, as well as how it should work across inheritance.

## Subsetting the object for its unformed state

The idea of explicitly selecting a subset of the object that participates in its
unformed state is important to dig into. The goal here is to enable types to
define potentially large portions of their state as remaining uninitialized for
efficiency without exposing code manipulating these types to initialization
unsafety. Making the subset explicit is important both to allow checking that
code is correctly accessing only the safe subset when operating on an unformed
object, and to enable sanitizers style diagnostics for the rest of the object.

### Subsetting by fields

We propose subsetting by fields rather than by a more complex approach such as a
[bit-mask](#bit-mask-based-unformed-state) because this is expected to be easy
to implement at low overhead, and meshes nicely with the struct literal syntax
already present in Carbon. This seems like an effective starting position, but
we should revisit it when introducing bitfields more fully to the language and

> determining how to reason about them.

Reviewer 2: Feels like maybe this section should be merged with the alternative considered (or just deleted since the alternative might be enough by itself).

Author: Yeah, deleted this and the previous section. Not adding anything.

Author: Done -- deleted.

## Comparison to `MaybeUninit` from Rust

It's important to compare and contrast what this proposal suggests to Rust's
`MaybeUninit` as they can seem superficially very similar.

Fundamentally, the goal of modeling unformed state is somewhat different from
`MaybeUninit` -- it is about providing access to types' internal invalid or
no-op states in order to provide improved ergonomics around initialization
without a significant safety loss. It is very much focused on enabling _type
design_ to opt into this, rather than intended for user code dealing with
complex initialization. Carbon may well end up needing something like
`MaybeUninit` to manage cases which cannot be modeled safely. Currently, the
plan is to directly use raw storage for this, but if doing so surfaces an
important abstraction layer on top like `MaybeUninit`, we should add it.

The differences in functionality provided by `Core.MaybeUnformed(T)` and its
expected usage (in assignment and destruction) follows from this different goal
of allowing a type to create an efficient and ergonomic API with initialization

> flexibility.

Reviewer 2: This talks a lot about what Carbon's `Core.MaybeUnformed(T)` is trying to do, but not how that is different from what Rust's `MaybeUninit` does -- is it only "user code dealing with complex initialization"? I thought it included delaying initialization of things like I/O buffers until data was read -- which seems pretty similar.

Author: Tried to do a better job of spelling out what I meant here, PTAL.

Author: Rewritten, and it now concedes your point instead of arguing around it: the I/O-buffer case is the same job, and `Core.MaybeUnformed(T)` is the type for a field observed while unformed exactly as `MaybeUninit<T>` is. [Comparison to `MaybeUninit` from Rust](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/pull/5913/files#diff-1249dfd7505dbbfc67e4fbb67e8ff0f985b8b993258d46479305c557edc2a6f2R1313)

The difference kept is narrower than what was there before: Carbon's carries the type's declared unformed state, so it may hold a meaningful representation such as a null pointer and `IsUnformed` can ask about it, where Rust's carries nothing and cannot be inspected.

For types that _do_ support unformed state, they may do so in three broad
categories based on the specific combination of the above properties they have:

1. Types where there is an invalid state that can be used as the unformed state,
   and it can _optionally_ be queried, but the destructor will be a no-op
   without checking for that state.
2. Types where there is an invalid state that can be used as the unformed state,

>    but the destructor must _check_ for that invalid state and skip meaningful

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
   but destruction must _check_ for that invalid state and skip meaningful
```

(since it can be done outside the dtor by the language)

on which tradeoffs are right for that specific type.

Types may alternatively _not_ have unformed state, either by necessity or
choice. Types with neither of the above properties are the simple case as they
_cannot support unformed state_. Other types may choose to not support an
unformed state even when they are capable, as that may result in a better API

> design type despite the ergonomic tradeoffs in the absence of an unformed state.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
design despite the ergonomic tradeoffs in the absence of an unformed state.
```
did "type" get added in here intentionally? if it was suggested by someone else please ignore this, but it looks like a typo to me

}
final impl forall [T:! UnformedInvalid] T as UnformedInit {
  where StructT = T.StructT;

  // The return should be a struct form that corresponds to the struct type
  // `StructT`, but with all members returned as initializing return forms. How
  // exactly to spell such a struct form return is beyond the scope of this
  // proposal, here we just use placeholder syntax of some keyword `form` to
  // transform the type into a form.

>   fn Op() -> form(StructT) {

Reviewer 2: A little odd since nothing in `form(StructT)` suggests "all member returned as initializing return forms"

Reviewer: Since this is just a placeholder for future syntax, maybe something like this:
```suggestion
  // The return should be a struct form that corresponds to the struct type
  // `StructT`, but with all members returned as initializing return forms. How
  // exactly to spell such a struct form return is beyond the scope of this
  // proposal, here we just use placeholder syntax to transform the type into a
  // form.
  fn Op() -> {var ...expand StructT} {
```

superset of the fields in `UnformedInit.StructT`. We refer to _hardening_ of an
unformed value as setting its fields to the result of `UnformedHardenInit.Op`,
and any additional initialization done by the compiler for security in the face

> of unsafe code. Which ever semantic model a type uses for its unformed state,

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
of unsafe code. Whichever semantic model a type uses for its unformed state,
```

definitively testing for an object being in an unformed (and potentially

> hardened) state.

Reviewer: I think it'd help to rename `UnformedHarden`  to `UnformedHardenInvalid` to emphasize that it must produce an invalid state, like `UnformedInvalid` does.

Author: Not taken, and the design moved in the opposite direction, so this is worth a look rather than just a no.

`UnformedHarden` composes with both categories: a type using `UnformedInvalid` must harden to a representation that is also invalid, and a type using `UnformedNoop` to one that is also a no-op state. Naming it `UnformedHardenInvalid` would be wrong for the second case. Both rules are now stated where they were previously left implicit: [consistency rules](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/pull/5913/files#diff-1249dfd7505dbbfc67e4fbb67e8ff0f985b8b993258d46479305c557edc2a6f2R836).

We combine this with the concept of
[adapting a type](/docs/design/generics/details.md#adapting-types) in an unsafe
way by modifying the adapt declaration with the `unsafe` keyword. Such an
adaptor has all the same properties as normal adapters, but the conversions
between the types are only available with `unsafe as`. These adapters can then
explicitly implement other conversion interfaces, but potentially do so
_conditionally_ or impose other restrictions such as only allowing them in one
direction. The syntax choice here was decided in leads issue #5930, with
[alternatives](#alternative-syntax-choices-for-unsafe-as-discussed-in-5930)
discussed below.

When an `interface` uses `extend impl`, we propose that an `impl` of that
interface can also write `extend impl` within its `impl`. Doing so requires that
an `impl` of the extended interface be visible, and incorporates that into the

> newly defined `impl` rather than requiring it to be duplicated. This also allows

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When an `interface` uses `extend impl`, we propose that an `impl` of that
interface can also write `extend impl` within its `impl`. Doing so requires that
an `impl` of the extended interface be visible, and incorporates that into the
newly defined `impl` rather than requiring it to be duplicated. This
`extend impl` will end with a semicolon `;`, instead of a definition block in curly
 braces `{`...`}`, but acts as a definition of the members of the extended
 interface. This also allows
```

the found _impl_ to be `final` because this precludes any changes to the aspects
of the `impl` that were final. This allows adapters to extend which layer of
these kinds of interface hierarchies they implement without breaking coherence:

```carbon
class A {}
class B {

>   unsafe adapt A;

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  // Provides definitions of both `B as UnsafeAs(A)` and
  // `A as UnsafeAs(B)`.
  unsafe adapt A;
```

}

// Explicit conversion from B -> A
impl B as As(A) {

>   extend impl as UnsafeAs(A);

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  // Uses the definition of `B as UnsafeAs(A)` provided
  // by `unsafe adapt A;` in the definition of `class B`.
  extend impl as UnsafeAs(A);
```

> }

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
}
// No implicit conversion from B -> A.
```

// Implicit conversion from A -> B
impl A is ImplicitAs(B) {

>   extend impl as UnsafeAs(B);

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  // Uses the definition of `A as UnsafeAs(B)` provided
  // by `unsafe adapt A;` in the definition of `class B`.
  extend impl as UnsafeAs(B);
```

  // Note, the destructor can simply be declared as accepting `Self`.
  // This will require the test for unformed to be synthesized prior
  // to automatic calls to the destructor, and requires explicit

>   // destructor calls from MaybeUnformed(OwningPtr(T)) to do that test themselves.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  // destructor calls from MaybeUnformed(OwningPtr(T)) to do that test
  // themselves.
```

problematic even in strict mode.

## Further details

### Expected standard type behavior

We expect integers, floating point numbers, pointers, and bool to all support
unformed states. Generally, we expect Core types in Carbon to provide unformed
state whenever there is a reasonable implementation strategy.

We also specifically expect pointers and bool to implement `IsUnformed`,
allowing types that build on top of these to use them to model their own
unformed state.

### Class types with a vtable

**Future work:** it would be very nice to allow types to reuse the
vtable-pointer field to implement their unformed state. This is left as future
work to address how to allow types to control opting-in and opting-out of this
behavior, as well as how it should work across inheritance.

### Comparison to `MaybeUninit` from Rust

It's important to compare and contrast what this proposal suggests to Rust's
`MaybeUninit` as they can seem superficially very similar.

Fundamentally, the goal of modeling unformed state is somewhat different from
`MaybeUninit` -- unformed state is about providing access to types' internal
invalid or no-op states in order to provide improved ergonomics around

> initialization without a significant safety loss. It is very much focused on

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
initialization without a significant safety loss. It is very much focused on
```
The goal isn't to have slightly less safety either. I think this is trying to say that you usually don't have to use `unsafe`?

Author: Yes, changed the wording here to talk about not needing unsafe user code.

Reviewer 5: Thanks, much improved.

enabling _type design_ to opt into this, rather than intended for user code
dealing with complex initialization.

Rust's `MaybeUninit` on the other hand is about explicitly modeling

> uninitialized memory, allowing unsafe code can in turn initialize it in ways

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
uninitialized memory, allowing unsafe code to initialize it in ways
```
